Title: Gathoni Wamuchomba Alleges Housing Levy A Land Grabbing Scheme
Author: Victor Kimani
Time: 2023-12-05 06:15:32.197167+00:00
Body: Wamuchomba questioned the intentions of the proposed Housing Scheme claiming it’s an avenue for the illegal acquisition of prime properties.  The Githunguri MP, while speaking to Spice FM this morning, raised concerns over the appropriateness of the Housing Scheme.  “The people I represent are not interested in housing. They are interested in markets, value addition chambers, revitalisation and revamping of coffee, tea and milk farming,” she asserted.  She went on to allege, “There are some schemes of taking over prime land and handing that land to other players unconstitutionally, unprocedurally, irregularly!”  The MP feels that the Housing Levy will remain a contentious political issue that even other subsequent administrations will have to grapple with.  She backed the resistance by Kiambu Governor, Kimani Wamatangi, in handing over land for the proposed Housing Programme. The first-time MP opined that the governor is just performing his role and he needs to exercise responsibility on behalf of Kiambu residents.   The Kiambu Governor has in the past faced criticism, including from Kiambu Senator Karungo wa Thangwa, about the delayed release of land for proposed housing projects.

Title: Mysterious Body Washes up From River
Author: Victor Kimani
Time: 2023-12-05 06:19:00.570058+00:00
Body: Unidentified Woman’s dead body washes up on River Athi as families try to identify their loved ones.  Families of eight people swept away by floods in River Muooni struggled to identify the body of a mysterious woman in Mutomo Mortuary, Kitui County.  The body was retrieved from River Athi and is being contested by multiple families of flood victims who were unable to positively identify it.  Mulei Mutungu, while speaking to KBC, stated that he thought the woman was his wife on first assessment. However, on assessing the woman’s teeth, he concluded that the woman was not his wife.  Other bereaved relatives attempted to identify the body but failed to positively link it to their loved ones.  The families have been instructed to provide DNA samples so as to assist in identifying the body.  Eight people were swept away by raging floods on River Muooni in Emali, Makueni County, as they attempted to cross the river.  The victims were returning from a meeting with First Lady Rachel Ruto in Nairobi when they encountered the swelling river and tried to cross it.  The area chief stated that they were sitting on a log floating in the middle of the river after being overwhelmed by swelling waters as they tried to cross.  They were eventually swept away as the flooding raged on as witnesses looked on helplessly. Attempts to recover their bodies are still ongoing.

Title: Police to Spy on Motorists Using Cameras
Author: Victor Kimani
Time: 2023-12-05 06:20:30.130622+00:00
Body: KENHA plans to introduce traffic cameras on highways to enable strict and remote enforcement of traffic regulations.  Transport CS, Kipchumba Murkomen, stated that KENHA was in the process of procuring traffic cameras to be placed on key roads.   The process is meant to be completed in the next three months. The CS added that cameras would be placed in 10 positions across a few major highways in the country.  The project will start in the pilot phase with plans to roll it out nationwide.   CS Murkomen asserted that he expects to implement a fully operating camera system in the country by the end of Kenya Kwanza’s term in office.  The system would enable motorists to be remotely observed from a command centre. Traffic offences would be instantly attributed to the culprits and fines applied.  “You overspeed, and you’re automatically fined. You overlap, you’re automatically fined, “ Murkomen remarked.  The government plans to establish a task force by the end of this year that will work on a smart transport system and an instant fining system.  Murkomen claimed, “We will have a command centre where the traffic police officer, instead of being on the streets, he is somewhere on a command centre.”  The Transport CS had promised to deploy the Intelligent Transport System during his vetting before the National Assembly Appointing Committee. He told the committee that the system would be used to collect fines from traffic offenders

Title: Residents Forced to Exhume Loved Ones as Karimenu Dam on the Verge of Spilling
Author: Victor Kimani
Time: 2023-12-05 13:32:07.633257+00:00
Body: Karimenu II Dam in Kiambu County has reached full capacity at a much faster rate than expected threatening the safety of nearby residents. The dam which was commissioned in August 2022 currently holds 26.5 billion litres of water and is spilling over the excess water.  Acting Athi Water Works CEO, Eng. Joseph Mwangi, speaking to Citizen TV reported that they have seen increases of about 1 billion litres per day. This has raised water levels upstream of the dam to the point that nearby residents have been forced to evacuate.  Eng. Mwangi stated that compensation efforts were underway and should be completed by February 2024. The excess water from the dam has began spilling over into people’s farms as the dam, which sits at 59 metres high, has filled to the brim.   While speaking to Citizen TV, Joseph Mutogu, one of the affected residents, lamented the short notice to evacuate provided the government given his limited financial means. There are four graves of his loved ones on his farm that would be potentially submerged by the overflowing dam. Another family living near the dam was able to retrieve the remains of their loved one in the nick of time before being submerged by the dam and buried it on another farm. The El Nino rains pounding the country have seen unprecedented levels of flooding with more than 80 Kenyans reported dead and thousands displaced.  The Kenya Meteorological Department has warned that the rains are likely to proceed until February 2024 in many parts of the country. Karimenu II Dam serves Gatundu, Ruiru, Juja, Githurai, Tatu City and parts of Nairobi, supplying up to 70 million litres per day.

Title: Floods Push Garissa Into Inflation
Author: Elon Musk
Time: 2023-12-06 11:54:42.164694+00:00
Body: Residents in Garissa and Madogo towns deal with hiked food and transport prices as floods intensify.
The flood situation in the North Eastern counties has exacerbated the already high cost of living. Transport routes have been cut off leading to a shortage of food supplies.
Residents in Madogo town claimed items in shops have increased by Ksh 50 to Ksh 100.
A businessperson, while speaking to Citizen TV, lamented that food transportation costs have been the main cause of the hikes with transportation costs being up to 5 times the price of acquiring the commodities.
Garissa Governor, Nathif Jama, served a stern warning to traders taking advantage of the desperate situation to hike prices. He warned that the traders will have their licenses cancelled if they proceed with offering any extortionist prices.
Transportation has also been a pain point for residents of Madogo and Garissa due to the flooding. Some roads have been cut off leading to the need to use boats for transportation.
One of the residents alleged that boat fares have tripled from Ksh 500 to Ksh1500 in the span of a day.
Kenya Red Cross rescued flood victims from Raya Farm, near Garissa town, who were stranded for three days in the floods. 
One of the victims, speaking to Citizen TV, intimated that they had to climb trees to keep themselves safe from the raging floods.
The humanitarian crisis caused by the floods has sparked the government to approve the release of Kshs7 billion contingencies fund to be directed to humanitarian response. 
This is in addition to the Kshs10 billion that was approved to be released to the county governments this week as part of shareable revenue. The government revealed that 38 of the 47 counties were now in the alarm stage of El Nino.
The Kenya National Highways Authority in response to the emerging transport crisis in Garissa stated that repairs will start as soon as water levels subside. They further advised motorists to keep off the damaged road.
It is yet to be seen whether the El Nino rains will subside soon with the Kenya Meteorological Department forecasting that the rains could go on until February 2024 in many parts of the country.

